About a year from now, the first class
of students at the University of Nevada,
Las Vegas School of Medicine will be on
their way toward becoming doctors. That
inaugural class of 60 medical students will
mark a notable milestone for healthcare in
southern Nevada, which for many years has
lacked the necessary medical professionals
to serve the region’s fast-growing
population. While efforts in both the
private and public sectors have increased
the number of doctors in Clark County,
our state and region continue to lag the
rest of the nation by a wide margin. In fact,
southern Nevada has a healthcare economy
only 70 percent of the size it should be to
serve a community of 2.1 million people.
The negative economic effects of this
shortage are well-documented and clearly visible throughout our community.
The shortage was also a primary motivation for state and local leaders to develop
the UNLV medical school. By providing an additional opportunity for competitive
allopathic medical education in Nevada’s largest metropolitan area, boosters hope
the new institution will be able to attract, train and retain more of the brightest
young minds from across the state and throughout the nation. Notably, about
seven in 10 doctors remain in the state where they completed their medical
education and training, so the vast majority of new doctors attending the UNLV
medical school are expected to remain in Nevada, helping to alleviate the state’s
doctor shortage. The medical school will also serve as an important component of
UNLV’s pursuit of top-tier status.
In just two short years, the medical school has already achieved a great deal,
including securing much-needed funding commitments from the state, as well
as signifi cant donations for scholarships and campus construction, recruiting
and hiring key faculty and staff positions, and agreeing to build the region’s
fi rst Academic Health Center in collaboration with University Medical Center of
Southern Nevada. Early achievements also include the opening this month of the
Ackerman Center for Autism and Neurodevelopment Solutions, a fi rst-of-its-kind
center in Nevada that will provide families with autistic children a wide range of
specialists for diagnostics, treatment and behavioral support.
These milestones are the fi rst of many that the UNLV medical school will achieve
in the years to come, thanks to broad-based support of elected o cials, the
business community and philanthropists. Moreover, their combined support and
investment will generate returns that will not only improve the health of our state
and the quality of southern Nevada’s fl agship university, they will also create
tangible economic returns that will ripple throughout the region. By 2025, the
medical school is projected to create 5,300 new jobs, a number that will grow to
8,000 by 2030. Meanwhile, total economic impact is projected at $800 million
in 2025, growing to $1.2 billion by 2030. Importantly, these impacts will be
concentrated within the health services sector, a critical need for our community
and an important growth industry for diversifying and strengthening our
regional economy.
As the UNLV medical school continues to progress toward its inaugural class,
I’m thankful for the foresight of our state’s leaders and their commitment to
the development of such an important institution, one that will improve our
community’s health, education and economy.
