Why is it that Las Vegas attracts so much
investment? The answer is simple. Fortytwo
million visitors will spend more than
$34 billion in Las Vegas in 2018. Every one
of those dollars is discretionary, and the
intense competition to capture them drives
innovation and investment.
We rebuild, and we rebrand; we construct
the world’s largest hotels and then countless
amenities and attractions designed to
fill them. This investment, in turn, drives
additional visitor spending. Some refer to
this as a “virtuous cycle.” Others call it a
unique form of American capitalism. In either
case, Las Vegas is the only U.S. economy
that evolved principally to host people,
and adding new and better experiences
is an essential element of attracting and
retaining visitors.
Those additions result in literally billions of dollars being invested each year and have
far-reaching economic benefits. Some we see, but most we don’t.
Not surprisingly, the biggest projects become front page news. Recently, this has
included: the $4 billion Resorts World Las Vegas project; the 60-story, 4,000-room
The Drew Las Vegas; The Madison Square Garden Company’s ambitious MSG Sphere
venue; the $1.8 billion Raiders Stadium; and the $1.4 billion Las Vegas Convention
Center renovation and expansion project.
Smaller, lower-profile projects rarely make the papers, but shouldn’t be overlooked.
Consider that a typical hotel room needs to be refurbished about every seven years.
With 147,000 rooms in the market, this means that as many as 20,000 hotel rooms are
being remodeled every year. What about the investments in all of the new restaurants,
bars and nightclubs? In 2018 alone, more than 20 notable restaurant openings are
planned in major hotel properties, including Los Angeles-based chef Ricardo Zarate’s
Once at the Grand Canal Shoppes, the $2 million Cipriani Las Vegas at Wynn, and
San Francisco-based Charles Phan’s Slanted Door Vietnamese concept at Caesars’
Forum Shops. Further, there are countless smaller investments that are nearly
impossible to see. These include everything from a retail kiosk startup at the
Fashion Show Mall; to the routine turnover of taxis, buses, limos and shuttles; to new
investments in sustainable water, wastewater and power technologies.
Big or small, these investments are all principally motivated by capturing some share
of that same $34 billion of visitor spending. And it is an unsurprising economic reality
that the bigger, better and more innovative concept has historically done just that.
Stated otherwise, innovation drives spending and spending drives innovation.
Perhaps more important than what has motivated the investment historically is
how we maintain it going forward. This community has the same 34 billion reasons
to ensure that the region’s tourism-based economy remains strong and those
investments continue. The industry employs more people and generates more wage
and salary payments than any other by a wide margin, and taxes paid by visitors are a
big reason Nevada has no corporate or personal income tax. Community investments
in transportation infrastructure, public safety and the promotion of major events pay
dividends that do not just add to our quality of life, they sustain our way of life.
Construction and investment will inevitably ebb and flow. But today, southern
Nevada has more than $18 billion in projects planned, proposed or currently under
construction. These, and countless smaller undertakings that fly under the radar,
reflect optimism, innovation and entrepreneurial spirit. In other words, they reflect the
very essence of our local economy.
